---
alias: [Operating Cash Flow Ratio]
created: 2021-03-02T22:22:12 (UTC +11:00)
tags: [Operating Cash Flow Ratio Definition, Analyzing a Company's Liquidity Using the Operating Cash Flow Ratio]
source: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/o/ocfratio.asp
author: Marshall Hargrave
---

# Operating [[Cash Flow]] Ratio Definition

> ## Excerpt
> The operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] ratio is a measure of how well current liabilities are covered by the cash flows generated from a company's operations. The operating cash flow ratio can gauge a company's [[Liquidity|liquidity]] in the short term.

---

[[Analyzing a Company's Liquidity Using the Operating Cash Flow Ratio]]
## What Is the Operating [[Cash Flow]] Ratio?

The operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] ratio is a measure of how readily current liabilities are covered by the cash flows generated from a company's operations. This ratio can help gauge a company's [[liquidity]](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/[[Liquidity|liquidity]].asp) in the short term.

Using [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] as opposed to net income is considered a cleaner or more accurate measure since earnings are more easily manipulated.

### Key Takeaways

-   The operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] ratio indicates if a company's normal operations are sufficient to cover its near-term obligations.
-   A higher ratio means that a company has generated more cash in a period than what was immediately needed to pay off current liabilities.
-   [[Cash Flow|Cash flow]] from operations (CFO) is preferred over net income because there is less room to manipulate results through accounting tricks.

## The Formula for Operating [[Cash Flow]] Ratio

Operating cash flow ratio\=Operating cash flowCurrent liabilities\\text{Operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] ratio} = \\frac {\\text{Operating cash flow}}{\\text{Current liabilities}}

The operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] ratio is calculated by dividing [[operating cash flow]](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/o/operatingcashflow.asp) by current liabilities. Operating cash flow is the cash generated by a company's normal business operations. 

### Operating [[Cash Flow]] Ratio Components

A company generates revenues—and deducts the cost of goods sold and other associated operating expenses, such as attorney fees and utilities, from revenues. [[Cash flow from operations]](https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/032615/what-are-some-examples-cash-flow-operating-activities.asp) is the cash equivalent of net income. It is the [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] after operating expenses have been deducted and before the commencement of new investments or financing activities.

Investors tend to prefer reviewing the [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] from operations over net income because there is less room to manipulate results. However, together, cash flows from operations and net income can provide a good indication of the quality of a firm's earnings. 

[Current liabilities](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/currentliabilities.asp) are all liabilities due within one fiscal year or operating cycle, whichever is longer. They are found on the balance sheet and are typically regarded as liabilities due within one year.

## Understanding the Operating [[Cash Flow]] Ratio

The operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] ratio is a measure of the number of times a company can pay off current debts with cash generated within the same period. A high number, greater than one, indicates that a company has generated more cash in a period than what is needed to pay off its current liabilities.

An operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] ratio of less than one indicates the opposite—the firm has not generated enough cash to cover its current liabilities. To investors and analysts, a low ratio could mean that the firm needs more capital.

However, there could be many interpretations, and not all are indications of poor financial health. For example, a firm may embark on a project that compromises cash flows temporarily but renders substantial rewards in the future.

## The Difference Between Operating [[Cash Flow]] Ratio and [[Current Ratio]]

Both operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] ratio and the [[current ratio]](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/currentratio.asp) measure a company’s ability to pay short-term debts and obligations.

The operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] ratio assumes cash flow from operations [[Will|will]] be used to pay those current obligations (i.e., current liabilities). The [[Current Ratio|current ratio]], meanwhile, assumes [[Current Assets|current assets]] will be used.

## Example of How to Use Operating [[Cash Flow]] Ratio

Consider two giants in the retail space, Walmart (NYSE: WMT) and Target (NYSE: TGT). As of Feb. 27, 2019, the two had current liabilities of $77.5 billion and $17.6 billion, respectively. Over the [[trailing 12 months]](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/t/ttm.asp), Walmart had generated $27.8 billion in operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]], while Target generated $6 billion.

The operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] ratio for Walmart is 0.36, or $27.8 billion divided by $77.5 billion. Target’s operating cash flow ratio works out to 0.34, or $6 billion divided by $17.6 billion. The two have similar ratios, meaning they have similar [[Liquidity|liquidity]]. Digging deeper, we find that the two also have similar current ratios as well, further validating that they indeed have similar liquidity profiles.

## Limitations of Using Operating [[Cash Flow]] Ratio

Although not as prevalent as with net income, companies can manipulate operating [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] ratios. Some companies deduct depreciation expenses from revenue even though it does not represent a real outflow of cash.

Depreciation expense is an accounting convention that is meant to write off the value of assets over time. As a result, companies should add depreciation back to cash in [[Cash Flow|cash flow]] from operations.
